---
layout: post
title: Cosine Tuning in Motor Cortical Neurons
date: 2018-09-22 00:00
description: to understand that neural cells have their preferred direction of movement and that it is distributed with a sinusoidal function
---

Cosine tuning has been well established for motor cortical cells. This article serves as an introduction to this topic mainly through studying Georgopoulos's paper published in 1982.

## Goals

* Are there any relations of single neuron activity to the direction of movement?
* Can we quantify the relations with a distribution?
* How do we decode from neural recordings?
* What's the significance of cosine tuning?

## A brief history

In 1968, Evarts observed the activity of single cells in the motor cortex of the monkey performing push-pull movements. He made pioneer discovery on relating cortical cells in the arm-related area to the movements. and to the muscular force generated by the animal.

Neuronal activity in the primate motor cortex can be related to the force exerted, to the direction, or to the velocity of the movement, alone or in combination. Of the three, the relations to the direction of the movement have been least well analyzed.[^Georgopoulos]

Previous studies utilized only two opposite directions in their experiments. So in 1982, Georgopoulos has thus performed an 8-direction study to examine the relations of single neuron activity to the direction of movement.[^Georgopoulos]

## Experimental set up

Four rhesus monkeys were used in Georgopoulos's experiment. They were trained to perform a task to move a manipulandum from the center to one of the eight directions of the working surface, prompted when the LED lights up at one of the eight targets.

Neural data are collected through placing a recording chamber over the arm area of the motor cortex under general anesthesia.

## Analysis using first degree periodic (sinusoidal) regression

* The following expressions are extracted from Georgopoulos's paper.*

Let $$ y_i (i = 1, 2, ..., 8 ) $$ be the mean rate when a cell discharges during movements towards direction $$ \theta_i = 0, 45, 90, ..., 315^{\circ}$$, respectively. We can fit a regress with

$$
y = b_0 + b_1sin \theta + b_2 cos \theta
$$

or alternatively,

$$
y = b_0 + \sqrt{b^2_1 + b^2_2} cos (\theta - \theta_0)
$$

where $$ b_0, b_1, b_2 $$ are regression coefficients that can be estimated with the least square unbiased estimators as follow

$$
b_0 = \bar{y} = 1/8(y_1 + y_2 + y_3 + ... + y_8)
$$

$$
b_1 = 1/4\big[\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}(y_2 + y_4 - y_6 - y_8) + (y_3- y_7)\big]
$$

$$
b_2 = 1/4\big[\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}(y_2 - y_4 - y_6 + y_8) + (y_1- y_5)\big]
$$

$$ \theta_0 $$ is the preferred direction. Using trigonometric moments, we can calculate $$ \theta_0 $$ by first defining

$$
\theta_0' = \tan^{-1}(\frac{b_1}{b_2}), \quad -45^{\circ} < \theta_0' < 45^{\circ}
$$

According to the quadrant, $$ \theta_0 $$ is given by

$$\theta_0 = \theta_0' \qquad\qquad\qquad \ if \ \ b_1 > 0, b_2 > 0 $$

$$\theta_0 = \theta_0' + 180^{\circ} \qquad\quad if \ \ b_2 < 0 $$

$$\theta_0 = \theta_0' + 360^{\circ} \qquad\quad if \ \ b_1 < 0, b_2 > 0 $$

A performance measure $$ R^2 $$ can indicate how well the regression fits:

$$
R^2 = \frac{\sum\hat{y}^{2}}{\sum{y^{2}}} = \frac{4(b^2_1+b^2_2)}{\sum{(y-\bar{y})^2}}
$$

An index of the directional modulation for increase in discharge at the preferred direction over the overall mean can be expressed as

$$
I = \frac{\sqrt{b^2_1 + b^2_2}}{b_0}, \quad b_0 > 0
$$

## Results

Of the 606 arm-related cells tested, 323 cells were active under the task circumstances. 296 cells have significant relations between cell discharge and the direction of movement during the total experimental time. Below are some of the key findings.

* Directional tuning curve: 241 cells express a directional preference and 75 $$\%$$ of them has an adequate fit with R$$^2 \geq$$ 0.7. More cells has preferred direction of 45$$^{\circ}$$ than 225$$^{\circ}$$.
* Change of neural discharge: When the movement direction was near (further away) the cell's preferred direction, an increase in activity occurred more (less) frequently.
* cells with preferred directions at or near (opposite or far from) the direction of the upcoming movement will be activated (inhibited).

* Significance

This paper demonstrated cosine tuning in the motor system, yet the biological explanation for its origin was not presented. Todorov has provided insight into why cosine tuning can be significant. He argues, through empirical observations, that it minimizes the net effect of neuromotor noise, thereby minimizing expected errors in force production.[^Todorov] He proves that a (truncated) cosine is the optimal force activation profile under arbitrary dimensions and arbitrary force direction distribution.

---
[^Georgopoulos]: A. P. Georgopoulos, J. F. Kalaska: R. Caminiti, and J. T. Massey. “on The Relations Between The Direction Of Two-dimensional Arm Movements And Cell Discharge In Primate Motor Cortex.” The Journal of Neuroscience, Vol. 2, No. 11, pp. 1527-1537. 1982

[^Todorov]: E. Todorov. 2002. “Cosine Tuning Minimizes Motor Errors.” Neural Computation 14 (6): 1233–60.